---
aliases:
  - "Data parallel Haskell: a status report"
  - Data parallel Haskell
  - DPH
tags:
  - reading
year: 2007
authors:
  - Chakravarty, Manuel M. T.
  - Leshchinskiy, Roman
  - Peyton Jones, Simon
  - Keller, Gabriele
  - Marlow, Simon
status: Todo
source: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1248648.1248652
related: 
itemType: conferencePaper
location: New York, NY, USA
pages: 10–18
DOI: 10.1145/1248648.1248652
ISBN: 978-1-59593-690-5
scheduled: 2024-08-20
---
**Data Parallel Haskell** is [[blellochProgrammingParallelAlgorithms1996|nested data parallelism]] in Haskell. It builds off of NESL by developing **fusion** techniques to reduce intermediate arrays generated by data parallelism. It does so in a way that makes it usable as a library, instead of requiring a bunch of compiler modifications (kinda like Rayon!).

# Prior work and the contribution

DPH situates itself as an extension of NESL. Specifically, it notes that NESL's "crucial breakthrough" was the *flattening* or *vectorization* transformation, transforming nested parallelism into operations on flat arrays.

This paper builds on that work in a few key ways:

- Data parallel programs generate lots of intermediate arrays. **Fusion techniques** eliminate those intermediates
- They introduce **Rust-style associated types**, a precursor to type/data families (which is a generalization of the former) to enable representing unboxed array types!
- This system can handle more than just built-in types, product, and array type. It can handle user-defined, sum, and function types!

# How does it work

First problem: how do we represent parallel arrays? In particular, in GHC they have boxed arrays by default; how can we get around that? Well, they have a datatype `[:e:]` representing *parallel arrays*. This datatype is defined as a type family in a typeclass `ArrElem`:

```haskell
class ArrElem e where
	data [:e:]                -- internal repr of array
	(!:) :: [:e:] -> Int -> e -- index
```

Every type `a` can define its own internal representation for what parallel arrays of that type should look like. We can take advantage of this to have a flat representation of nested arrays!

```haskell
class ArrElem a => ArrElem [:a:] where
	-- fst is flat data array with elements
	-- snd stores starting position and length of subarrays
	data [:[:a:]:] = ([:a:], [:(Int, Int):])
	(arr, segd) !: i = sliceP arr (segd !: i)
	-- sliceP extracts subarray from larger array in constant time
```

Then, when users write code operating on their parallel arrays:

```haskell
dotp :: SparseVector -> Vector -> Float
dotp sv v = sumP (mapP (\(x,i) -> x * (v!:i)) sv)
```

After any array comprehension syntax has been desugared into regular degular function calls, we use Haskell user-level rewrite rules to *lift* sequential operations to parallel ones. In this case, we want to lift multiplication:

```haskell
bpermuteP :: [:a:] -> [:Int:] -> [:a:]
bpermuteP v is = [: v!:i | i <- is :]

dotp :: SparseVector -> Vector -> Float
dotp (ArrPair is xs) v = sumP (xs *^ bpermuteP v is)
```

This generates lots of intermediate arrays. `bpermuteP v is` creates one, `xs ^* ...` creates another. If we have a thread pool, we need to synchronize every time a temporary is completed. Ideally, we want each thread to do traversal, extraction, multiplication, and summing all on its own. This is **[[ahoDragon10112007#^ybh9ii|loop fusion]]**!

```c
for (...)
	a()
for (...)
	b()

// into

for (...)
	a()
	b()
```

To do this, the authors create the `Dist a` type, representing a chunk to be assigned to each thread of type `a`. They implement operations on `Dist a` types, like `mapD` and `zipD`. Since each of these calls requires a synchronization at the end, they then use rewrite rules to fuse together operations, like `forall f g xs. mapD f (mapD g xs) = mapD (f . g) xs`.

Data-parallel operations can be decomposed into parallel operations over distributed types and sequential operations that are executed simultaneously by all members of a thread pool.